SUBJECT: Where is the Time Going?
Date: Sept 14, 2026

Dear family and friends:

It was so awesome to talk to you all today - or yesterday- depending on which hemisphere you are in.  So awesome to hear all the sole survivor stories and see the fun and love you all share.  And kudos to all the support teams.  Mom truly missed being in the race with you all and I could think of so many great songs to queue up as your crew captain during the 5 minutes in base camp. We certainly miss you all.  But happily we are not homesick.  It is truly a blessing to pick your own companion and know that transfer after transfer I can still have that companion.  The Good Lord knows I need my companion to keep me going and on the straight and narrow.  She is a work horse.  There is no stop in her.

And to address the ‘cleaning’ issue that Jackson brought up.  I know we write about cleaning and sweating but that, anymore, is not more than an hour or two each week at the most.  Just when we do clean it is when we were not expecting to, we were not prepared to, and because of those factors we don’t have time to clean well.  And factor in to that mom’s cleaning standard of even being just a ‘little clean' is way above Filipino standards of being adequately clean.  So there you have it.  And I think it is a little bit like Japanese culture where people will look at you and agree to what you are asking but not intend to follow through.  They will say, ‘yes’, to save face.  We ask the landlords to clean well before we move in and they say of course and for sure and then when we move in there is no evidence of any cleaning that happened.  That’s when mom and I grab a few rags and try to give the missionaries a decent place to move in to.  

This has not been as crazy of a week as we usually have had the last month or so.  But we did have a unique move.  It all started 2 weeks ago at transfers with the Calasiao Elders, Poleo and Kuru-Iakopo, (both Elders from the South Pacific) - oh wait, we are kind of in the South Pacific - anyway remember their flooded entrance to the apartment and electrical popping?  Well they located a new apartment just down the road, we contacted the owner the next day and within 3 days we were moving them.  We moved them in before we had signed a contract and before we had paid any money toward rent or a deposit.  The Lord’s hand is definitely in the fine details of this mission and protecting His missionaries.  I believe it is the good name of the church and the Spirit we carry around that allows for these things to happen.  It feels like at times we are doing a ‘Jedi mind trick’ with people - only it is with the true ‘force’ and because of the Holy Ghost.  In our little housing world we often tell the owners the terms, how it is going to be executed, what changes to their apartments we will make (and it usually benefits them greatly) and it is all agreed to.  One could say it's because of the financial benefit to the owner, or the Philippine culture that they agree to these terms - but it is across the board with all owners here so I know it is the Spirit going with us to smooth the real estate transaction process.  Like this last owner had their own contract he wanted us to sign.  There was a lot of stuff that just wasn’t fit for us as a church and how we occupy apartments.  So we had a PDF of his contract and literally altered it and sent it back to him and he accepted it.  He had a ‘penalty’ portion of the contract that included 2% fee per month if we were late or not paying and we told him that we wouldn’t include that.  So he agreed to not include it.  And this was a retired Colonel from the Philippine army who is very put together and runs a ‘tight ship’.  It is still amazing at the heavenly help we get on this mission.

Wait, we were going to share about the move but as old people, we got side tracked. OK, this is the apartment where the entry steps are waist deep in water.  The day before the move it rained (as usual) like cats and dogs.  So we feared the water would be deeper.  We had messaged the landlord to make sure the other tenants had their truck moved out of the shared entry drive so we could back our truck up right to the stair rail and load over the railing right into the bed of the truck.  We figured that area would still be in a foot of water so we could stand in the bed and reach up to the first landing to get the items.  When we get to the house sure enough there is about a foot of standing water where we place chairs to climb up over the railing.  And…..there is no truck in the driveway – but blocking the driveway entrance is a 30’ diesel truck that is broken down and being repaired right there.  So we can’t back in anyway.  So we haul everything down the stairs, over the first landing to one of us standing below in the water on a rickety plastic chair and haul it to our pickup.  Most items were not so crazy but we had to move a fridge.  So luckily we are with the 2 Elders and a neighbor (squatter next door).  We put a rope sling on the fridge and lift it over the landing rail. The top of the railing is about 8 feet off the ground.  Myself and the other Elder were down below and lowered the fridge down as we stood in our boots in the flood water.  Things I will never be able to do again.  We got all the apartment items out in 2 pickup loads.  The funniest part of this move was at the end when I was checking the apartment to make sure we had gotten it all.  As we were shutting the door (had to slam it hard as it had swollen and wouldn’t shut) the neighbor guy who is squatting in the next door apartment because his house is at the bottom of the stairs and has 3 feet of water in it - well this guy asks me if I can just leave it unlocked.  What?  He wanted to start living in this apartment as well.  I told him no, that we were still renting it.  But he was happy anyway.  I had just given him a cooktop that still worked but was rusted out in the area that supported the burners making it a bit unsafe for missionaries.

I was asked to accompany the ward choir as they sing in a stake fireside next week.  We are singing, ‘Consider the Lilies' Such a beautiful song.  And the ward music sister who is leading the choir lacks a lot of ability to lead music and lead choirs and sing on pitch.  So she asks me for help and advice.  It's like trying to redirect a 747 coming in for a landing by blowing at it.  But, what these people lack in musical ability they make up for in vigor and volume.  Singing the correct notes is more secondary than singing with volume and spirit.  And I think a lot of people here can’t tell the choir is off pitch so it will be great.  As an aside - karaoke here is very popular and we hear a lot of it in neighborhoods at all times.  People buy big speakers and a microphone and evidently have parties or just sit in their houses and belt out karaoke.  And it is all off-pitch and nobody cares. And it's wonderful Philippino culture.

Zone Conference for us was Thursday - and what a spiritual feast. Sister Foster taught us about Ester. Ester 4:14 . . . and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? She taught us that every missionary here (us included) are placed in the Philippines Urdaneta Mission for a reason - we are perfectly placed at this time. That is what Elder Rasband told the missionaries of this mission when he visited - that they were perfectly placed. So then it’s up to me and to you and to Elder Ostler and to all of us to find out why? Why were we placed where we are at, at this time. So we go to work everyday, and we ask Heavenly Father to guide us and to help us know where we need to be to help move the work forward in this mission. And many many many times we can look back at our day and see the hand of The Lord guiding us, even though at the time we weren’t really hearing shouting from Heaven. We just went the way we thought we should go.

And I think it’s important to acknowledge His hand - OFTEN. If you aren’t praying regularly, start now. I wasn’t praying regularly before the mission, but it makes all of the difference in my day now. 
President Foster taught us about being relentless. He taught about what Alma Younger did, how he became a new creature. And we can all have our Alma the Younger moment, we can strive to have a better relationship with God and Jesus. I’d say that for a majority of my life I always thought that I was in charge (shocker) but being on a mission and learning to turn to Him has taught me that He is in charge. I just think I am. But if we turn to Him when we are down or sad or fearful or angry, if we turn our thoughts to Him, it changes our outlook and we can see more clearly. 

As we drive the roads of the Philippines, we are seeing a very different way of life than where we live in Richland. And many of these people have very little and yet they are happy and they offer help to us often. Count your blessings - all of you - and teach your kids to count their blessings. Teach them that they don’t need ‘things’ to be happy. Happy is a choice. 

One other super fun thing about Zone Conference was that to illustrate the baptisms our mission had last month (111) even after losing 80 missionaries in the mission split, they had a big tray with 111 candy bars on it. It was impressive. Sister Foster talked about 111 souls that were brought to the waters of Baptism and the visual with the candy bars was awesome. Then she gave each zone 111 candy bars to split. And we even got a little bag of American candy. 

And we glossed over last P-Day.  Last week we took a real P-Day as we mentioned and visited the Burrups in Manilla.  We mostly just sat around and talked and traded war stories, miracles, info on how to better do our assignments.  The Burrups are so cool and we are blessed as a family to have hung out with their kids in various ways as we grew up together.

One of the pictures we are sending is Delene and I doing a P-Day activity - getting our hair cut - and at the same time.  For $11.66 we both got shampooed, head massaged, cut, shampooed again and styled.  Then Delene got a pedi-mani for about $22 US.

The picture of Delene across the flooded road is us making an emergency call to a Sister's apartment.  This whole area is flooded but the sisters still go out and work.  Since Delene's boots are only ankle high we had to park next to a tall sidewalk so she could step out of the truck and not get gross flood water in her boots. - and the reason for the visit?  The sisters accidentally locked a bedroom door and neither they nor the landlord had a key for the door.  Most apartments and houses have keyed locks on all doors inside the house - bedroom and bathroom doors.  So we had to pry the knob off - completely destroying it and then install a new knob - and for this job I had left my channel locks somewhere and had to do it with pliers and screwdrivers.

For the grandkids - Please begin reading the Book of Mormon.  I first started reading the Book of Mormon myself between the ages of 8-10.  I started by reading chapter headings and then between 10-12 began solidly reading it.  I know some of you are at that age, and even you younger ones are good readers- you can begin now.  Here is my challenge.  Determine that you want to read the Book of Mormon and begin reading it on your own.  Just a little bit every day.  It will be the best thing you can do for yourself.  I love the Book of Mormon.  I still read it and study from it even though I have read it so many times.  I promise you that as you read it that you will become a nicer and happier person. Ask your parents about what my favorite parts are.  Many times as we read as a family I would pop off and say that a certain part was the best part and my favorite and my kids would laugh at me and tell me that I said that last week or 2 weeks ago.  I have so many favorite parts.

We love all of you.

Love,
Elder and Sister Ostler
Granny and Grandpa
Mom and Dad